Step one, acquiring data.
The first step in the data science
process is to acquire the data.
You need to obtain the source material
before analyzing or acting on it.
The first step in acquiring data is
to determine what data is available.
Leave no stone unturned when it comes
to finding the right data sources.
You want to identify suitable
data related to your problem and
make use of all data that is relevant
to your problem for analysis.
Leaving out even a small
amount of important data
can lead to incorrect conclusions.
Data, comes from, many places, local and
remote, in many varieties,
structured and un-structured.
And, with different velocities.
There are many techniques and technologies
to access these different types of data.
Let's discuss a few examples.
A lot of data exists in
conventional relational databases,
like structure big data
from organizations.
The tool of choice to access data from
databases is structured query language or
SQL, which is supported by all
relational databases management systems.
Additionally, most data base systems
come with a graphical application
environment that allows you to query and
explore the data sets in the database.
Data can also exist in files such as
text files and Excel spreadsheets.
Scripting languages are generally
used to get data from files.
A scripting language is a high
level programming language
that can be either general purpose or
specialized for specific functions.
Common scripting languages with support
for processing files are Java Script,
Python, PHP, Perl, R, and
MATLAB, and are many others.
An increasingly popular way
to get data is from websites.
Web pages are written using
a set of standards approved by
a world wide web consortium or
shortly, W3C.
This includes a variety of formats and
services.
One common format is
the Extensible Markup Language, or XML,
which uses markup symbols or tabs to
describe the contents on a webpage.
Many websites also host web services which
produce program access to their data.
There are several types of web services.
The most popular is REST because it's so
easy to use.
REST stand for
Representational State Transfer.
And it is an approach to implementing
web services with performance,
scalability and maintainability in mind.
Web socket services are also
becoming more popular
since they allow real time
modifications from web sites.
NoSQL storage systems are increasingly
used to manage a variety of data
types in big data.
These data stores are databases
that do not represent data
in a table format with columns and rows as
with conventional relational databases.
Examples of these data stores include
Cassandra, MongoDB and HBASE.
NoSQL data stores provide APIs
to allow users to access data.
These APIs can be used directly or in an
application that needs to access the data.
Additionally, most NoSQL
systems provide data access
via a web service interface, such a REST.
Now, let's discuss our wildfire case study
as a real project that acquires data
using several different mechanisms.
The WIFIRE project stores sensor data from
weather stations in a relational database.
We use SQL to retrieve this data
from the database to create
models to identify weather patterns
associated with Santa Anna conditions.
To determine whether a particular weather
station is currently experiencing
Santa Anna conditions, we access real
time data using a web socket service.
Once we start listening to this service,
we receive weather station
measurements as they occur.
This data is then processed and
compared to patterns found by our models
to determine if a weather station is
experiencing Santa Ana conditions.
At the same time Tweets are retrieved
using hashtags related to any fire
that is occurring in the region.
The Tweet messages are retrieves
using the Twitter REST service.
The idea is to determine the sentiment
of these tweets to see if people
are expressing fear, anger or are simply
nonchalant about the nearby fire.
The combination of sensor data and
tweet sentiments helps
to give us a sense of the urgency
of the fire situation.
As a summary,
big data comes from many places.
Finding and evaluating data
useful to your big data analytics is
important before you start acquiring data.
Depending on the source and
structure of data,
there are alternative ways to access it.